.. _philosopy:

==========
Philosophy
==========

Coding is a Craft
=================

The Code Craftsmen believe that great software is not merely the
result of well-defined software requirements, sound computing theory,
and good engineering practice.  The creation of truly great software
also requires a clear overarching vision, a sense of aesthetics, a bit
of ingenuity and intuition, and a good measure of experience, skill,
and patience.  In this regard, writing code may be considered more of
a craft than an art, a science, or an engineering discipline.  The
result of this craft should be something that is both useful and
beautiful in its design, like a piece of fine furniture, a custom
home, a quality hand tool, or a handcrafted guitar.

Tools are Important
===================

If coding is a craft, then programmers must be craftsmen.  Although
the old saying "it's a poor craftsman that blames his tools" rings
true, others argue that "a workman is only as good as his tools".
Although the latter statement may be flawed, there is certainly some
truth in it.  One does not have to look very hard to notice the value
a professional craftsman places on his tools, and how those tools
increase his effectiveness.  The Code Craftsmen believe that quality
software development tools are important, and we are dedicated to
building those tools and getting them into the hands of developers.

Programmers are Caretakers
==========================

The Code Craftsmen also realize that, with very few `exceptions`_, a
computer program is never really finished.  A large part of our work
is maintaining existing code and adapting it to meet new requirements.
Sometimes, with a long-lived code base, it seems as if the program
takes on a life of its own.  Like a resilient garden plant, it grows
and changes in reponse to its environment.  New requirements cause it
grow in different directions, causing some parts to blossom and some
parts atrophy or decay from disuse.  In this context, the programmer
plays the role of a caretaker, or gardener, pruning and directing the
growth of a code base to keep it healthy, managable, and beautiful.
As code caretakers, we would be well-advised to keep maintainability
and adaptability in mind as we make design decisions, especially since
code oftens tends to live on longer than we anticipate.

Beauty Matters
==============

All too often, the source code of a program is regarded as simply a
means to an end.  While this may be true to a degree, the Code
Craftsmen observe that in practice, the design, structure, and
readability of source code can have a significant effect on the
functionality, reliability, and maintainability of the end product.
The source code is like the foundation of a house -- the foundation
may not be seen, but the house cannot stand without it.  At the very
least, the quality of the source code affects the mindset of the
programmer.  A happy programmer who can easily understand and modify
the program with powerful tools is an effective one.  Even aside from
these arguments, the Code Craftsmen desire to write beautiful code for
beauty's sake, if nothing else.  But, of course, beauty is in the mind
of the coder...

.. _exceptions: https://texfaq.org/FAQ-TeXfuture
