======
Status
======

The Big Picture
===============

At this point (with the exceptions noted below), the majority of our code
crafting tools are in the early stages of development.  Most of the concepts
have been proven by building real-world applications using prototype
implementations of these tools in an internal code base, but the process of
knitting all of the pieces together into a cohesive, open-source suite of
development tools and software libraries will take some time.  Please
continue reading to learn more about our approach and where we are headed.

Projects with Substance
=======================

The following software projects are the most mature and may currently have
enough substance to be of some interest to others:

`Cuddl <cuddl>`
  This project is already useful for writing user-space device drivers that
  can be used on real-time `Xenomai <xenomai>` and standard `Linux <linux>`
  systems.  Support for `RTEMS <rtems>` is planned, but has not been
  implemented at this time.

`Wumps <wumps>`
  The grammar for this language is fairly complete and the parser is able to
  parse source files and build an abstract syntax tree.  There are several
  example source files with accompanying documentation that demonstrate the
  language syntax.

`Tydl <tydl>`
  This project currently consists of a tutorial, reference documentation,
  some proof-of-concept utility code and simple, but functional, example
  programs that demonstrate the desired C++ *Smart Structure* API.  There is
  no code generator at this point, but you can see the desired source
  specification for some simple data types alongside the C++ code that would
  be generated by running a command-line tool.

`Hildegard <hildegard>`
  This project provides a proof-of-concept graphical editor that can be used
  to create block diagrams and export them in SVG, PNG, and PDF formats.
